=== ch 2 p 1
BOOK: All children, except one, grow up. They soon know that they will grow up, and the way Wendy knew was this. One day when she was two years old she was playing in a garden, and she plucked another flower and ran with it to her mother. I suppose she must have looked rather delightful, for Mrs. Darling put her hand to her heart and cried, “Oh, why can’t you remain like this forever!” This was all that passed between them on the subject, but henceforth Wendy knew that she must grow up. You always know after you are two. Two is the beginning of the end.
MAIN: Wendy learns when she is two that she must grow up. Her mother wishes she could stay small forever.
SIMPLE: All children grow up, except one. Children soon know that they will grow up. Wendy learned it in this way. One day, when she was two years old, she was playing in a garden. She pulled off another flower and ran with it to her mother. I think she must have looked very lovely, because Mrs. Darling put her hand to her heart and cried, "Oh, why can't you stay like this forever!" That was all they said about it. But from then on Wendy knew that she must grow up. You always know after you are two. Two is the beginning of the end.
=== ch 2 p 16
BOOK: Mrs. Darling first heard of Peter when she was tidying up her children’s minds. It is the nightly custom of every good mother after her children are asleep to rummage in their minds and put things straight for next morning, repacking into their proper places the many articles that have wandered during the day. If you could keep awake (but of course you can’t) you would see your own mother doing this, and you would find it very interesting to watch her. It is quite like tidying up drawers. You would see her on her knees, I expect, lingering humorously over some of your contents, wondering where on earth you had picked this thing up, making discoveries sweet and not so sweet, pressing this to her cheek as if it were as nice as a kitten, and hurriedly stowing that out of sight. When you wake in the morning, the naughtinesses and evil passions with which you went to bed have been folded up small and placed at the bottom of your mind; and on the top, beautifully aired, are spread out your prettier thoughts, ready for you to put on.
MAIN: Mrs. Darling hears of Peter when she tidies her children's minds. The writer says every good mother does this at night.
SIMPLE: Mrs. Darling first heard of Peter when she was tidying up her children's minds. Every good mother does this each night after her children are asleep. She looks through their minds and puts things straight for the next morning. She puts back in the right places the many things that moved about during the day. If you could stay awake (but of course you can't), you would see your own mother doing this. It is very interesting to watch. It is like tidying drawers. You would see her on her knees, staying a while in a playful way over some of your things, and wondering where you found this thing. Some things she finds are sweet and some are not so sweet. She presses this one to her cheek as if it were as nice as a kitten, and quickly puts that one out of sight. When you wake in the morning, the naughty things and bad feelings that you took to bed have been folded up small and put at the bottom of your mind. On top, nicely aired, are your prettier thoughts, ready for you to put on.
=== ch 3 p 94
BOOK: Alas, he would not listen. He was determined to show who was master in that house, and when commands would not draw Nana from the kennel, he lured her out of it with honeyed words, and seizing her roughly, dragged her from the nursery. He was ashamed of himself, and yet he did it. It was all owing to his too affectionate nature, which craved for admiration. When he had tied her up in the backyard, the wretched father went and sat in the passage, with his knuckles to his eyes.
MAIN: Mr. Darling will not listen to his wife. He drags Nana out of the nursery and ties her up, and he feels ashamed.
SIMPLE: Sadly, he would not listen. He had decided to show who was master in that house. Orders did not bring Nana out of her kennel, so he pulled her out with sweet words. Then he took hold of her roughly and dragged her from the nursery. He felt ashamed of himself, and yet he did it. It was all because his nature was too loving and wanted people to admire him very much. After he tied her up in the backyard, the unhappy father went and sat in the passage with his knuckles to his eyes.
=== ch 3 p 104
BOOK: No. 27 was only a few yards distant, but there had been a slight fall of snow, and Father and Mother Darling picked their way over it deftly not to soil their shoes. They were already the only persons in the street, and all the stars were watching them. Stars are beautiful, but they may not take an active part in anything, they must just look on forever. It is a punishment put on them for something they did so long ago that no star now knows what it was. So the older ones have become glassy-eyed and seldom speak (winking is the star language), but the little ones still wonder. They are not really friendly to Peter, who has a mischievous way of stealing up behind them and trying to blow them out; but they are so fond of fun that they were on his side tonight, and anxious to get the grownups out of the way. So as soon as the door of 27 closed on Mr. and Mrs. Darling there was a commotion in the firmament, and the smallest of all the stars in the Milky Way screamed out:
MAIN: The stars may only look on, as a punishment. Tonight the little stars are on Peter's side and want the grown-ups out of the way.
SIMPLE: No. 27 was only a few yards away. A little snow had fallen, so Father and Mother Darling stepped carefully over it, to keep their shoes clean. They were the only people in the street, and all the stars were watching them. Stars are beautiful, but they cannot take an active part in anything. They must just look on forever. It is a punishment for something they did so long ago that no star now knows what it was. So the older stars have glassy eyes and seldom speak (winking is the star language), but the little ones still wonder. They are not really friendly to Peter, who likes to creep up behind them and try to blow them out. But they love fun so much that tonight they were on his side, and wanted the grown-ups out of the way. So when the door of 27 closed on Mr. and Mrs. Darling, there was a great noise and excitement in the sky, and the smallest of all the stars in the Milky Way screamed out:
=== ch 4 p 9
BOOK: If he thought at all, but I don’t believe he ever thought, it was that he and his shadow, when brought near each other, would join like drops of water; and when they did not he was appalled. He tried to stick it on with soap from the bathroom, but that also failed. A shudder passed through Peter, and he sat on the floor and cried.
MAIN: Peter cannot join his shadow back on to himself. He is shocked, sits on the floor and cries.
SIMPLE: If Peter thought at all (but I do not think he ever thought), he thought that his shadow and he would join like drops of water when they were brought near each other. When they did not join, he was shocked. He tried to stick the shadow on with soap from the bathroom, but that did not work either. A shake of fear went through Peter, and he sat on the floor and cried.
=== ch 4 p 59
BOOK: “It was because I heard father and mother,” he explained in a low voice, “talking about what I was to be when I became a man.” He was extraordinarily agitated now. “I don’t want ever to be a man,” he said with passion. “I want always to be a little boy and to have fun. So I ran away to Kensington Gardens and lived a long long time among the fairies.”
MAIN: Peter tells Wendy why he ran away. He does not want to be a man. He wants to be a little boy and have fun always.
SIMPLE: Peter explained in a low voice that it was because he heard his father and mother talking about what he would be when he became a man. He was now very upset. "I never want to be a man," he said strongly. "I always want to be a little boy and have fun. So I ran away to Kensington Gardens and lived a very long time with the fairies."
=== ch 4 p 61
BOOK: “You see, Wendy, when the first baby laughed for the first time, its laugh broke into a thousand pieces, and they all went skipping about, and that was the beginning of fairies.”
MAIN: Peter tells Wendy how fairies began. They began with a baby's first laugh.
SIMPLE: You see, Wendy, when the first baby laughed for the first time, its laugh broke into a thousand pieces. All the pieces went skipping about. That was the beginning of fairies.
=== ch 5 p 8
BOOK: Sometimes it was dark and sometimes light, and now they were very cold and again too warm. Did they really feel hungry at times, or were they merely pretending, because Peter had such a jolly new way of feeding them? His way was to pursue birds who had food in their mouths suitable for humans and snatch it from them; then the birds would follow and snatch it back; and they would all go chasing each other gaily for miles, parting at last with mutual expressions of goodwill. But Wendy noticed with gentle concern that Peter did not seem to know that this was rather an odd way of getting your bread and butter, nor even that there are other ways.
MAIN: The children fly for days. Peter gets food for them in an odd way, by taking it from birds.
SIMPLE: Sometimes it was dark and sometimes light. Now they were very cold, and then too warm. Did they really feel hungry at times, or were they only pretending, because Peter had such a jolly new way of feeding them? His way was to chase birds that had food in their mouths that humans could eat, and take it from them. Then the birds would follow and take it back. They would all chase each other happily for miles, and at last they would part, each saying kind things to the other. But Wendy saw, with gentle worry, that Peter did not seem to know that this was a rather odd way of getting your bread and butter. He did not even know that there are other ways.
=== ch 5 p 130
BOOK: Tink was not all bad: or, rather, she was all bad just now, but, on the other hand, sometimes she was all good. Fairies have to be one thing or the other, because being so small they unfortunately have room for one feeling only at a time. They are, however, allowed to change, only it must be a complete change. At present she was full of jealousy of Wendy. What she said in her lovely tinkle Wendy could not of course understand, and I believe some of it was bad words, but it sounded kind, and she flew back and forward, plainly meaning “Follow me, and all will be well.”
MAIN: Tink is full of jealousy of Wendy. She leads Wendy away, and Wendy follows her.
SIMPLE: Tink was not all bad. Or rather, she was all bad just now, but sometimes she was all good. Fairies have to be one thing or the other, because they are so small that they have room for only one feeling at a time. They are allowed to change, but it must be a complete change. At present she was full of jealousy of Wendy. Wendy could not understand what she said in her lovely tinkle. I think some of it was bad words, but it sounded kind, and Tink flew back and forward, plainly meaning "Follow me, and all will be well."
=== ch 6 p 6
BOOK: The first to pass is Tootles, not the least brave but the most unfortunate of all that gallant band. He had been in fewer adventures than any of them, because the big things constantly happened just when he had stepped round the corner; all would be quiet, he would take the opportunity of going off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and then when he returned the others would be sweeping up the blood. This ill-luck had given a gentle melancholy to his countenance, but instead of souring his nature had sweetened it, so that he was quite the humblest of the boys. Poor kind Tootles, there is danger in the air for you tonight. Take care lest an adventure is now offered you, which, if accepted, will plunge you in deepest woe. Tootles, the fairy Tink who is bent on mischief this night is looking for a tool, and she thinks you the most easily tricked of the boys. ’Ware Tinker Bell.
MAIN: Tootles is brave but unlucky. He always misses the big adventures. Tink thinks he is the easiest boy to trick.
SIMPLE: The first to pass is Tootles. He is not the least brave of that bold group, but he is the most unlucky. He had been in fewer adventures than any of them. The big things always happened just when he had stepped round the corner. All would be quiet, he would go off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and when he came back the others would be sweeping up the blood. This bad luck gave a gentle sadness to his face. But it did not make him sour. It made him sweeter, so that he was the most humble of the boys. Poor kind Tootles, there is danger in the air for you tonight. Take care that an adventure is not offered to you which, if you accept it, will bring you deep sorrow. Tootles, the fairy Tink is looking for a tool because she wants to make trouble this night, and she thinks you are the easiest of the boys to trick. Beware of Tinker Bell.
=== ch 6 p 57
BOOK: “To return to the ship,” Hook replied slowly through his teeth, “and cook a large rich cake of a jolly thickness with green sugar on it. There can be but one room below, for there is but one chimney. The silly moles had not the sense to see that they did not need a door apiece. That shows they have no mother. We will leave the cake on the shore of the mermaids’ lagoon. These boys are always swimming about there, playing with the mermaids. They will find the cake and they will gobble it up, because, having no mother, they don’t know how dangerous ’tis to eat rich damp cake.” He burst into laughter, not hollow laughter now, but honest laughter. “Aha, they will die.”
MAIN: Hook plans to make a big, rich cake and leave it by the lagoon. He thinks the boys will eat it and die.
SIMPLE: "We will go back to the ship," Hook said slowly through his teeth, "and cook a large rich cake, a jolly thick one, with green sugar on it. There can be only one room below, because there is only one chimney. The silly moles did not have the sense to see that they did not need a door each. That shows they have no mother. We will leave the cake on the shore of the mermaids' lagoon. These boys are always swimming there, playing with the mermaids. They will find the cake and eat it up fast, because, having no mother, they do not know how dangerous it is to eat rich damp cake." He burst into laughter, not hollow laughter now, but honest laughter. "Aha, they will die."
=== ch 7 p 85
BOOK: The difference between him and the other boys at such a time was that they knew it was make-believe, while to him make-believe and true were exactly the same thing. This sometimes troubled them, as when they had to make-believe that they had had their dinners.
MAIN: Peter cannot tell make-believe from real things. The other boys can, and this sometimes troubles them.
SIMPLE: The difference between Peter and the other boys at such a time was that they knew it was make-believe. To Peter, make-believe and true were exactly the same thing. This sometimes troubled them, as when they had to pretend that they had had their dinners.
=== ch 7 p 119
BOOK: “It certainly does need a chimney,” said John importantly. This gave Peter an idea. He snatched the hat off John’s head, knocked out the bottom, and put the hat on the roof. The little house was so pleased to have such a capital chimney that, as if to say thank you, smoke immediately began to come out of the hat.
MAIN: Peter finds a chimney for Wendy's house in John's hat. Smoke comes out of it at once.
SIMPLE: "It certainly does need a chimney," said John importantly. This gave Peter an idea. He took the hat off John's head, knocked out the bottom, and put the hat on the roof. The little house was so pleased to have such a good chimney that smoke came out of the hat at once, as if to say thank you.
=== ch 8 p 2
BOOK: One of the first things Peter did next day was to measure Wendy and John and Michael for hollow trees. Hook, you remember, had sneered at the boys for thinking they needed a tree apiece, but this was ignorance, for unless your tree fitted you it was difficult to go up and down, and no two of the boys were quite the same size. Once you fitted, you drew in your breath at the top, and down you went at exactly the right speed, while to ascend you drew in and let out alternately, and so wriggled up. Of course, when you have mastered the action you are able to do these things without thinking of them, and then nothing can be more graceful.
MAIN: Each boy needs a hollow tree that fits him. Going up and down is easy only if the tree fits.
SIMPLE: One of the first things Peter did next day was to measure Wendy and John and Michael for hollow trees. Hook, you remember, had laughed at the boys for thinking they needed a tree each. But he did not know. Unless your tree fitted you, it was hard to go up and down, and no two of the boys were quite the same size. When you fitted, you drew in your breath at the top, and down you went at just the right speed. To go up, you drew in and let out your breath one after the other, and so wriggled up. When you have learned how, you can do these things without thinking about them, and then nothing can be more graceful.
=== ch 8 p 16
BOOK: Adventures, of course, as we shall see, were of daily occurrence; but about this time Peter invented, with Wendy’s help, a new game that fascinated him enormously, until he suddenly had no more interest in it, which, as you have been told, was what always happened with his games. It consisted in pretending not to have adventures, in doing the sort of thing John and Michael had been doing all their lives: sitting on stools flinging balls in the air, pushing each other, going out for walks and coming back without having killed so much as a grizzly. To see Peter doing nothing on a stool was a great sight; he could not help looking solemn at such times, to sit still seemed to him such a comic thing to do. He boasted that he had gone a walk for the good of his health. For several suns these were the most novel of all adventures to him; and John and Michael had to pretend to be delighted also; otherwise he would have treated them severely.
MAIN: Peter invents a game of pretending not to have adventures. He likes it for a while and then loses interest.
SIMPLE: Adventures happened every day, as we shall see. But at this time Peter invented, with Wendy's help, a new game that he liked very much, until he suddenly lost all interest in it. As you have been told, this always happened with his games. The game was to pretend not to have adventures. It meant doing what John and Michael had done all their lives: sitting on stools and throwing balls in the air, pushing each other, going out for walks and coming back without having killed even a grizzly. It was a great sight to see Peter doing nothing on a stool. He could not help looking serious at such times, because sitting still seemed to him such a funny thing to do. He said proudly that he had gone for a walk for the good of his health. For several suns these were the newest of all adventures to him. John and Michael had to pretend to be happy about it too, or he would have been hard on them.
=== ch 9 p 2
BOOK: If you shut your eyes and are a lucky one, you may see at times a shapeless pool of lovely pale colours suspended in the darkness; then if you squeeze your eyes tighter, the pool begins to take shape, and the colours become so vivid that with another squeeze they must go on fire. But just before they go on fire you see the lagoon. This is the nearest you ever get to it on the mainland, just one heavenly moment; if there could be two moments you might see the surf and hear the mermaids singing.
MAIN: If you shut your eyes, you may see colours that become the lagoon. It is as near as you get to it on the mainland.
SIMPLE: If you shut your eyes and are lucky, you may sometimes see a shapeless pool of lovely pale colours in the dark. Then if you squeeze your eyes tighter, the pool starts to take shape. The colours become so bright that, with one more squeeze, they must catch fire. But just before they catch fire, you see the lagoon. This is the nearest you ever get to it on the mainland: just one heavenly moment. If there could be two moments, you might see the surf and hear the mermaids singing.
=== ch 9 p 136
BOOK: Not the pain of this but its unfairness was what dazed Peter. It made him quite helpless. He could only stare, horrified. Every child is affected thus the first time he is treated unfairly. All he thinks he has a right to when he comes to you to be yours is fairness. After you have been unfair to him he will love you again, but he will never afterwards be quite the same boy. No one ever gets over the first unfairness; no one except Peter. He often met it, but he always forgot it. I suppose that was the real difference between him and all the rest.
MAIN: Hook's bite shocks Peter because it is unfair. The writer says Peter is different because he always forgets unfairness.
SIMPLE: It was not the pain of the bite but the unfairness of it that shocked Peter. It made him helpless. He could only stare, filled with horror. Every child feels this way the first time someone is unfair to him. All he thinks he has a right to, when he comes to you to be yours, is fairness. After you have been unfair to him he will love you again, but he will never afterwards be quite the same boy. No one ever gets over the first unfairness. No one except Peter. He often met it, but he always forgot it. I think that was the real difference between him and all the rest.
=== ch 10 p 5
BOOK: It was not really a piece of paper; it was the Never bird, making desperate efforts to reach Peter on her nest. By working her wings, in a way she had learned since the nest fell into the water, she was able to some extent to guide her strange craft, but by the time Peter recognised her she was very exhausted. She had come to save him, to give him her nest, though there were eggs in it. I rather wonder at the bird, for though he had been nice to her, he had also sometimes tormented her. I can suppose only that, like Mrs. Darling and the rest of them, she was melted because he had all his first teeth.
MAIN: The thing on the water is the Never bird. She is trying to reach Peter in her nest to save him.
SIMPLE: It was not really a piece of paper. It was the Never bird, making great efforts to reach Peter on her nest. By working her wings, in a way she had learned since the nest fell into the water, she could guide her strange boat to some extent. But by the time Peter knew who it was, she was very tired. She had come to save him. She had come to give him her nest, even though there were eggs in it. I rather wonder at the bird, because he had been nice to her, but he had also sometimes been cruel to her. I can only think that, like Mrs. Darling and the rest of them, she was touched because he had all his first teeth.
=== ch 10 p 23
BOOK: The Never bird saw at once what he was up to, and screamed her admiration of him; and, alas, Peter crowed his agreement with her. Then he got into the nest, reared the stave in it as a mast, and hung up his shirt for a sail. At the same moment the bird fluttered down upon the hat and once more sat snugly on her eggs. She drifted in one direction, and he was borne off in another, both cheering.
MAIN: The bird sees Peter's plan and screams that she likes it. Peter sails away in the nest, and the bird sits on her eggs in the hat.
SIMPLE: The Never bird saw at once what he was doing, and she screamed that she admired him. Sadly, Peter crowed that he agreed with her. Then he got into the nest, set the stave up in it as a mast, and hung up his shirt as a sail. At the same moment the bird flew down onto the hat and again sat comfortably on her eggs. She drifted one way and he was carried the other way, and both were cheering.
=== ch 11 p 8
BOOK: We have now reached the evening that was to be known among them as the Night of Nights, because of its adventures and their upshot. The day, as if quietly gathering its forces, had been almost uneventful, and now the redskins in their blankets were at their posts above, while, below, the children were having their evening meal; all except Peter, who had gone out to get the time. The way you got the time on the island was to find the crocodile, and then stay near him till the clock struck.
MAIN: This is the evening of the Night of Nights. The boys eat their meal, and Peter has gone out to find the time.
SIMPLE: We have now reached the evening that was to be called the Night of Nights, because of its adventures and what came of them. The day had been almost quiet, as if it was quietly gathering its forces. Now the redskins in their blankets were at their posts above, and below the children were having their evening meal. Only Peter was missing. He had gone out to get the time. On the island, the way to get the time was to find the crocodile and stay near him until the clock struck.
=== ch 11 p 97
BOOK: None of them knew. Perhaps it was best not to know. Their ignorance gave them one more glad hour; and as it was to be their last hour on the island, let us rejoice that there were sixty glad minutes in it. They sang and danced in their nightgowns. Such a deliciously creepy song it was, in which they pretended to be frightened at their own shadows; little witting that so soon shadows would close in upon them, from whom they would shrink in real fear. So uproariously gay was the dance, and how they buffeted each other on the bed and out of it! It was a pillow fight rather than a dance, and when it was finished, the pillows insisted on one bout more, like partners who know that they may never meet again. The stories they told, before it was time for Wendy’s good night story! Even Slightly tried to tell a story that night, but the beginning was so fearfully dull that it appalled even himself, and he said gloomily:
MAIN: The children have one last happy hour. They sing, dance and have a pillow fight before the story.
SIMPLE: None of them knew. Maybe it was best not to know. Not knowing gave them one more happy hour. As it was to be their last hour on the island, let us be glad that there were sixty happy minutes in it. They sang and danced in their nightgowns. It was a deliciously creepy song, in which they pretended to be frightened of their own shadows. They hardly knew that soon shadows would close in on them, and they would shrink from them in real fear. The dance was so noisy and happy, and how they pushed and hit each other on the bed and off it! It was more a pillow fight than a dance. When it was finished, the pillows asked for one more round, like partners who know that they may never meet again. And the stories they told, before it was time for Wendy's good night story! Even Slightly tried to tell a story that night, but the beginning was so very dull that it shocked even him, and he said sadly:
=== ch 12 p 74
BOOK: But of course he cared very much; and he was so full of wrath against grownups, who, as usual, were spoiling everything, that as soon as he got inside his tree he breathed intentionally quick short breaths at the rate of about five to a second. He did this because there is a saying in the Neverland that, every time you breathe, a grownup dies; and Peter was killing them off vindictively as fast as possible.
MAIN: Peter is angry with grown-ups. He breathes fast because of a saying in the Neverland that each breath kills a grown-up.
SIMPLE: But of course he cared very much. He was so full of anger against grown-ups, who, as usual, were spoiling everything, that as soon as he got inside his tree he breathed short quick breaths on purpose, about five to a second. He did this because there is a saying in the Neverland that every time you breathe, a grown-up dies. And Peter was killing them off as fast as he could, as a way to hurt them back.
=== ch 12 p 54
BOOK: That was the story, and they were as pleased with it as the fair narrator herself. Everything just as it should be, you see. Off we skip like the most heartless things in the world, which is what children are, but so attractive; and we have an entirely selfish time; and then when we have need of special attention we nobly return for it, confident that we shall be embraced instead of smacked.
MAIN: The writer says children go off without a care, and come back when they need help, sure that their mothers will hug them.
SIMPLE: That was the story, and they were as pleased with it as the fair story-teller herself. Everything was just as it should be, you see. Off we skip like the most heartless things in the world, which is what children are, but so attractive. We have a completely selfish time. Then when we need special care, we nobly come back for it, sure that we shall be hugged and not smacked.
=== ch 13 p 12
BOOK: Peter was such a small boy that one tends to wonder at the man’s hatred of him. True he had flung Hook’s arm to the crocodile; but even this and the increased insecurity of life to which it led, owing to the crocodile’s pertinacity, hardly account for a vindictiveness so relentless and malignant. The truth is that there was a something about Peter which goaded the pirate captain to frenzy. It was not his courage, it was not his engaging appearance, it was not —. There is no beating about the bush, for we know quite well what it was, and have got to tell. It was Peter’s cockiness.
MAIN: Hook hates Peter very much, more than the crocodile story explains. The writer says the reason is Peter's cockiness.
SIMPLE: Peter was such a small boy that one wonders at the man's hatred of him. It is true that he had thrown Hook's arm to the crocodile. But even this, and the greater danger to Hook's life that came from the crocodile not giving up, hardly explain such a hatred that would not stop and wished harm. The truth is that there was something about Peter that pushed the pirate captain to wild anger. It was not his courage. It was not his pleasant looks. It was not --. There is no use going round the subject, because we know well what it was, and we have to tell it. It was Peter's cockiness.
=== ch 13 p 22
BOOK: The doomed children answered with a cheer that was music to the black hearts above, and almost immediately they repeated their goodbyes to Peter. This puzzled the pirates, but all their other feelings were swallowed by a base delight that the enemy were about to come up the trees. They smirked at each other and rubbed their hands. Rapidly and silently Hook gave his orders: one man to each tree, and the others to arrange themselves in a line two yards apart.
MAIN: The boys cheer because they think the redskins won. The pirates are glad that the boys will come up the trees.
SIMPLE: The children, who were doomed, answered with a cheer. It was music to the black hearts above. Almost at once they said their goodbyes to Peter again. This puzzled the pirates, but all their other feelings were swallowed by a low delight that the enemy were about to come up the trees. They smirked at each other and rubbed their hands. Quickly and silently, Hook gave his orders: one man to each tree, and the others to stand in a line two yards apart.
=== ch 14 p 12
BOOK: Unaware of the tragedy being enacted above, Peter had continued, for a little time after the children left, to play gaily on his pipes: no doubt rather a forlorn attempt to prove to himself that he did not care. Then he decided not to take his medicine, so as to grieve Wendy. Then he lay down on the bed outside the coverlet, to vex her still more; for she had always tucked them inside it, because you never know that you may not grow chilly at the turn of the night. Then he nearly cried; but it struck him how indignant she would be if he laughed instead; so he laughed a haughty laugh and fell asleep in the middle of it.
MAIN: Peter tries to show that he does not care that Wendy has gone. He plays his pipes and then falls asleep in the middle of a laugh.
SIMPLE: Peter did not know about the sad things that were happening above. For a little time after the children left, he had gone on playing happily on his pipes. This was no doubt a rather sad try to show himself that he did not care. Then he decided not to take his medicine, to make Wendy sad. Then he lay down on the bed outside the cover, to annoy her even more, because she had always tucked them inside it, since you never know that you may not grow cold at the turn of the night. Then he nearly cried. But it came to him how angry she would be if he laughed instead, so he laughed a proud laugh and fell asleep in the middle of it.
=== ch 14 p 65
BOOK: The clapping stopped suddenly; as if countless mothers had rushed to their nurseries to see what on earth was happening; but already Tink was saved. First her voice grew strong; then she popped out of bed; then she was flashing through the room more merry and impudent than ever. She never thought of thanking those who believed, but she would have liked to get at the ones who had hissed.
MAIN: The children's clapping saves Tink. She is soon well and lively again.
SIMPLE: The clapping stopped suddenly, as if countless mothers had rushed to their nurseries to see what on earth was happening. But already Tink was saved. First her voice grew strong. Then she popped out of bed. Then she was flashing through the room, more merry and rude than ever. She never thought of thanking those who believed, but she would have liked to get at the ones who had hissed.
=== ch 15 p 8
BOOK: Hook was not his true name. To reveal who he really was would even at this date set the country in a blaze; but as those who read between the lines must already have guessed, he had been at a famous public school; and its traditions still clung to him like garments, with which indeed they are largely concerned. Thus it was offensive to him even now to board a ship in the same dress in which he grappled her; and he still adhered in his walk to the school’s distinguished slouch. But above all he retained the passion for good form.
MAIN: Hook is not his real name. He went to a famous school, and its ways stay with him, above all the wish for good form.
SIMPLE: Hook was not his true name. To tell who he really was would, even at this date, set the country in a blaze. But as those who read between the lines must already have guessed, he had been at a famous public school. Its ways still stayed with him like clothes, which are largely what they are about. So even now he disliked to go on board a ship in the same clothes in which he had fought her. And in his walk he still kept to the school's special slouch. But above all he kept the passion for good form.
=== ch 15 p 69
BOOK: It is sad to know that not a boy was looking at her as Smee tied her to the mast; the eyes of all were on the plank: that last little walk they were about to take. They were no longer able to hope that they would walk it manfully, for the capacity to think had gone from them; they could stare and shiver only.
MAIN: The boys stare at the plank and cannot think. None of them looks at Wendy.
SIMPLE: It is sad to know that not a boy was looking at her as Smee tied her to the mast. All their eyes were on the plank, the last little walk they were about to take. They could no longer hope that they would walk it bravely, because they were not able to think any more. They could only stare and shake.
=== ch 16 p 2
BOOK: Odd things happen to all of us on our way through life without our noticing for a time that they have happened. Thus, to take an instance, we suddenly discover that we have been deaf in one ear for we don’t know how long, but, say, half an hour. Now such an experience had come that night to Peter. When last we saw him he was stealing across the island with one finger to his lips and his dagger at the ready. He had seen the crocodile pass by without noticing anything peculiar about it, but by and by he remembered that it had not been ticking. At first he thought this eerie, but soon he concluded rightly that the clock had run down.
MAIN: Peter sees that the crocodile is no longer ticking. He decides that the clock has run down.
SIMPLE: Odd things happen to all of us on our way through life, and for a time we do not notice that they have happened. For example, we suddenly find that we have been deaf in one ear for we don't know how long, but say half an hour. Now such a thing had happened that night to Peter. When we last saw him, he was creeping across the island with one finger on his lips and his dagger ready. He had seen the crocodile go past without noticing anything strange about it. But after a while he remembered that it had not been ticking. At first he thought this was strange and frightening, but soon he rightly decided that the clock had run down.
=== ch 16 p 96
BOOK: He had one last triumph, which I think we need not grudge him. As he stood on the bulwark looking over his shoulder at Peter gliding through the air, he invited him with a gesture to use his foot. It made Peter kick instead of stab.
MAIN: Hook wins one last thing. Peter kicks him instead of stabbing him, and Hook goes to the crocodile.
SIMPLE: He had one last win, which I think we need not refuse him. He stood on the bulwark and looked back over his shoulder at Peter flying through the air toward him. With a movement, he asked Peter to use his foot. It made Peter kick instead of stab.
=== ch 17 p 14
BOOK: The only change to be seen in the night-nursery is that between nine and six the kennel is no longer there. When the children flew away, Mr. Darling felt in his bones that all the blame was his for having chained Nana up, and that from first to last she had been wiser than he. Of course, as we have seen, he was quite a simple man; indeed he might have passed for a boy again if he had been able to take his baldness off; but he had also a noble sense of justice and a lion courage to do what seemed right to him; and having thought the matter out with anxious care after the flight of the children, he went down on all fours and crawled into the kennel. To all Mrs. Darling’s dear invitations to him to come out he replied sadly but firmly:
MAIN: Mr. Darling thinks everything is his fault. He lives in Nana's kennel until the children come back.
SIMPLE: The only change to be seen in the night-nursery is that between nine and six the kennel is no longer there. When the children flew away, Mr. Darling felt deep inside that all the blame was his, for having chained Nana up, and that from first to last she had been wiser than he. Of course, as we have seen, he was quite a simple man. He might have passed for a boy again if he had been able to take off his baldness. But he also had a noble sense of fairness and the courage of a lion to do what seemed right to him. After thinking the matter over with great care after the children's flight, he went down on his hands and knees and crawled into the kennel. Mrs. Darling asked him kindly many times to come out, but he answered sadly and firmly:
=== ch 17 p 73
BOOK: And so when Mrs. Darling went back to the night-nursery to see if her husband was asleep, all the beds were occupied. The children waited for her cry of joy, but it did not come. She saw them, but she did not believe they were there. You see, she saw them in their beds so often in her dreams that she thought this was just the dream hanging around her still.
MAIN: Mrs. Darling finds the children in their beds. She thinks it is a dream.
SIMPLE: And so when Mrs. Darling went back to the night-nursery to see if her husband was asleep, all the beds were full. The children waited for her cry of joy, but it did not come. She saw them, but she did not believe they were there. You see, she saw them in their beds so often in her dreams that she thought this was just the dream still hanging around her.
=== ch 18 p 72
BOOK: That was the last time the girl Wendy ever saw him. For a little longer she tried for his sake not to have growing pains; and she felt she was untrue to him when she got a prize for general knowledge. But the years came and went without bringing the careless boy; and when they met again Wendy was a married woman, and Peter was no more to her than a little dust in the box in which she had kept her toys. Wendy was grown up. You need not be sorry for her. She was one of the kind that likes to grow up. In the end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker than other girls.
MAIN: Wendy never sees Peter again as a girl. She grows up and marries, and the writer says she wanted to grow up.
SIMPLE: That was the last time the girl Wendy ever saw him. For a little longer she tried, for his sake, not to have growing pains. She felt she was not loyal to him when she got a prize for general knowledge. But the years came and went without bringing the careless boy. When they met again, Wendy was a married woman, and Peter was no more to her than a little dust in the box in which she had kept her toys. Wendy was grown up. You need not be sorry for her. She was one of the kind that likes to grow up. In the end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker than other girls.
=== ch 18 p 168
BOOK: As you look at Wendy you may see her hair becoming white, and her figure little again, for all this happened long ago. Jane is now a common grownup, with a daughter called Margaret; and every spring-cleaning time, except when he forgets, Peter comes for Margaret and takes her to the Neverland, where she tells him stories about himself, to which he listens eagerly. When Margaret grows up she will have a daughter, who is to be Peter’s mother in turn; and thus it will go on, so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.
MAIN: Peter keeps coming for the daughters of Wendy's family. The story will go on as long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.
SIMPLE: As you look at Wendy, you may see her hair becoming white and her figure becoming small again, because all this happened long ago. Jane is now an ordinary grown-up, with a daughter called Margaret. Every spring-cleaning time, except when he forgets, Peter comes for Margaret and takes her to the Neverland. There she tells him stories about himself, and he listens eagerly. When Margaret grows up she will have a daughter, who is to be Peter's mother in turn. And so it will go on, as long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.
